Add the Build-In Question Type Customization and 3rd-Party Component Integration articles (#3219)
surveyjs/survey-creator: docs/create-specialized-question-types.md

# Create Specialized Question Types

> Built-in question types are versatile and multi-functional, but in some cases, you need a question type with a more specific functionality. For example, you need to populate a [Dropdown](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel) question in advance. You can create a regular Dropdown question and specify its [`choices`](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel#choices) or [`choicesByUrl`](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel#choicesByUrl) property (depending on whether the choices come from a server or not). The following code shows a Country question configured in this manner:

Reviewer: I first thought that the first approach is what you recommend (before I saw the "drawbacks" part). So maybe we should prepare the reader that we will show two ways to do this. 

```suggestion
Built-in question types are versatile and multi-functional, but in some cases, you need a question type with a more specific functionality. For example, you need to pre-populate a [Dropdown](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel) with a country list. You can use a regular Dropdown and customize it directly or you can create a specialized questions type. The first approach is more straightforward, but the second results in a more reusable solution. Let's consider both. 

The first example pre-populates a standard Dropdown question. You can specify the [`choices`](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel#choices) or [`choicesByUrl`](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel#choicesByUrl) property (depending on whether the choices come from a server or not). The following code shows a Country question configured in this manner:
```

    "url": "https://surveyjs.io/api/CountriesExample"
  }
}
```

If you [add this question to the Toolbox](/Documentation/Survey-Creator?id=toolbox#add-a-custom-toolbox-item), end users can use it in their surveys. However, this approach has a number of drawbacks:

- End users can edit the `choicesByUrl` property and break the functionality.
- If the question needs modifications (for example, if the server URL has changed), end users have to modify every created instance of this question individually.
- In the JSON definition, your custom question looks like a regular Dropdown question.

To avoid these drawbacks, use a different approach: add your custom question type to the survey's `ComponentCollection`:

```js
Survey.ComponentCollection.Instance.add({
  // A unique name; must use lowercase
  name: "country", 
  // A display name used in the Toolbox
  title: "Country", 
  // A JSON definition for the base question type (Dropdown in this case)
  questionJSON: {
    "type": "dropdown",
    "optionsCaption": "Select a country...",
    "choicesByUrl": {
      "url": "https://surveyjs.io/api/CountriesExample",
    }
  }
});
```

This approach gives you the following advantages:

> - A corresponding toolbox item is added automatically.

Reviewer: Active :-) 

```suggestion
- A corresponding toolbox item appears automatically.
```

The first example pre-populates a standard Dropdown question. You can specify the [`choices`](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel#choices) or [`choicesByUrl`](/Documentation/Library?id=questiondropdownmodel#choicesByUrl) property (depending on whether the choices come from a server or not). The following code shows a Country question configured in this manner:

```json
{
  "name": "country",
  "type": "dropdown",
  "optionsCaption": "Select a country...",
  "choicesByUrl": {
    "url": "https://surveyjs.io/api/CountriesExample"
  }
}
```

If you [add this question to the Toolbox](/Documentation/Survey-Creator?id=toolbox#add-a-custom-toolbox-item), end users can use it in their surveys. However, this approach has a number of drawbacks:

- End users can edit the `choicesByUrl` property and break the functionality.

> - If the question needs modifications (for example, if the server URL has changed), end users have to modify every created instance of this question individually.

Reviewer 2: end users have to modify - тут имеется в виду что им нужно это делать или им приходится это делать?

- In the JSON definition, your custom question looks like a regular Dropdown question.

To avoid these drawbacks, use a different approach: add your custom question type to the survey's `ComponentCollection`:

```js
Survey.ComponentCollection.Instance.add({
  // A unique name; must use lowercase
  name: "country", 
  // A display name used in the Toolbox
  title: "Country", 
  // A JSON definition for the base question type (Dropdown in this case)
  questionJSON: {
    "type": "dropdown",
    "optionsCaption": "Select a country...",
    "choicesByUrl": {
      "url": "https://surveyjs.io/api/CountriesExample",
    }
  }
});
```

This approach gives you the following advantages:

- A corresponding toolbox item appears automatically.
- End users cannot break the functionality because the Property Grid hides the `questionJSON` object properties.

> - If you modify the question configuration, the changes automatically apply to every instance of this question.

Reviewer 2: If you modify the question configuration, changes are automatically applied to every instance of this question.
